# Sumner Boundary & Raster Maps
Write a short sentence or two about this project and what it does. Be sure to include a link and a screenshot (we're front end devs so we can actually see our work!).

**Disclaimer:** Furtado & Associates maintains a policy of not allowing company property for personal use, so I don't have any documents or pictures of my project. However, I can describe the work I did and the process we followed.

## How It's Made:

**Tech used:** ArcGIS Pro, ArcGIS Online, Autodesk Civil 3D, Microsoft Excel, Office Database

### Boundary Map
The Sumner Boundary Map was one of many boundary maps I have created, this however was one of two boundary maps that I did without receiving help. The process starts with opening up ArcGIS Pro and finding out the project scope specifications of where I've working in, in this case, Sumner. Next, I change the coordinate system to refer to the datum based off the scope of work so it can be accurate. Furtado uses their own specialized coordinate system which makes their work really accurate. It's due to this that a lot of companies like Sound Transit prefer working with them the most and how timely they are with their projects. I then create a project boundary which outlines the project scope I'm working in. I use a polygon tool with ArcGIS to set it over the boundary I'm working on. From there I use the Feature Class to Feature Class tool to take the newly added data and take ownership of said data from the original source, kind of like a hand me down from older siblings. It then takes the data and scrubs it to take whatever I want, it's like taking off the data of another person and inputting my own data. This also very handy since it causes the data to be easily used and that it doesn't take a long time to load and render, which is necessary for bigger datasets I find. This is one of the tools that will be used for cleaning the datasets that are added to the map view. I used the Feature Class to Feature Class tool to add the boundary I made into the database which I also changed the color to be red in the Symbology pane. If the boundary has a big area for a scope of work, then i would have to subdivide the boundary. However that step isn't used yet here so it will be talked about later.

Next I start looking for datasets, I looked from open datasets such as the county GIS portal to find data and also ArcGIS Online, I also look for data using the metadata as well. The types of data I found can range from GPS data, water, waterwaste, storm drains, culverts, and other types of utilities and I then use GIS database elements within ArcGIS to make it more usable. Either during or after data collection I then verfiy the metadata by accessing the Properties of said data and go to source tab which takes me to the link where the metadata is available. After the process is done, I start cleaning the data using ETL process (extracting, transforming, and loading). I use the Feature Class to Feature Class tool to have the new data on my database for easy access. I then check the attirbute table and metadata to see which variables are important for me to glean the information off of for analysis and for the things I'm gonna do. I then filter the data by using the Select By Location and Selection By Attirbutes for Boundaries tools. Select By Location tool tells ArcGIS Pro to select the data in said location and fit the data within it, in this case the data is fitted within the boundary that I made earlier. I right-click the layers that were selected and hovered over Selection then Create new layer from selected features. For the Selection By Attributes for Boundaries I select a specific area to fit to the scope of the work boundary, while being on the same layer that I selected, I attract specific types of the data within the layer using math terminology to find said types. For example, if I'm looking for culverts I select the featype_desc (or whatever column has this on different datasets on the attirbute table) is equal to culverts. It then filters out the culverts and I can create a new layer from the selection. Each datasets has multiple types so it's important to split them up for project purposes. I then feature the class to geodatabase to input the new trimmed layers that I made into the database for easy access. After sending it to the database, I filter it again if need be. If there is no location for the easting and northing or longitude and latitude, I add a field in the attribute table, put double for the data types, numeric for the number format, and I dothe same steps addinglayers for the other directions. I then match the northing or easting directions or even longitude and latitude as x or y coordinates depending on the native directions and ran it on the Calculate Geometry Attirbutes tool. Lastly, i change the symbology on the points to make sure that they are at the correct settings. 

Next up is integrating the data from ArcGIS into Autodesk Civil 3D for efficient management and visualization. Doing this enabled accurate area spedification, supporting comprehensive project scopes. I then used the Feature Class to Shapefile to export the GIS data into the Autodesk CAD software. I export the files into the office database of teh company and I sort my exported data into separate folder types. It goes from Sanitary Swers, Stormwater, and Water. In those three folders I then separate even further to points or line data. It will make it easier for the work I will do on Autodesk. Autodesk Civil 3D has capabilitie of displaying information that canbe mapped for Civil Enginerring design for 2D & 3D diagrams as well as basemaps. When openingn the Autodesk map I set up the coordinates up and went to mapimport to import the shapefiles from ArcGIS. I first uploaded the map boundary and later the rest of the data. There are two types of data: line and points have different ways of prepping the data inside Autodesk. FOr line values since you have them to plot on the map, I went to the spatial filter window. On the line of define window, click the icon next to it. Click the top left corner to the bottom right corner and click. Click OK to leave the whole window. Go to the Home tab, click on layer properties. Click the autohide above the gear. Scroll to ‘G’ section on the layer properties. Click on the white colored box,you can even select multiple ones. Click the box and choose a color . FOr the point values you have to assign block standards for each of them. On the points tab for the ‘mapimport’, click the ‘…’ square, then create as blocks. For the drop-down, select existing hydrant (existing hyd) (or whatever description you want). The dropdowns are not alphabetically ordered. Check ‘get attribute values form fields’. For Modeled_system, select proposed Hyd. For the water_valves, select water valve. Do the data column for the points as well, repeat the same process as the boundary and
lines. Click icon besides define window pane and click and set the boundaries. Turn off the map. Select points click and drag over the points. Type in selectsimilar. On the home tab, hover over properties (looks like a Gameboy on the left next to the
project explorer. On scale X,Y,Z put 20. Click the ESC key. It should have made the blocks visible. The blocks could be in small specs or very large specs. If they are large leave them at the scale of 1. Hit ‘ESC’ ALWAYS before changing the scale of others. Select the water systems on the layer properties (to select multiple items that skip do a combination of shift, and after that do ctrl and click the rest). Select the color blue. To see it on different layouts, go to the bottom left corner of the map pane and select layout 1 or 2. Storm points will be their own specific blocks as well. Do the same steps for setting up points and the blocks of them. Catch basins, inlets, storm drain, junction box, sand box, catch base, unknown,
other should be selected as ‘catch basins’. Outfalls, cleanouts, structures, fittings, stormwater discharge (all types of them) should be ‘AeccTickCircle’. For the water classification for systems valves and control valves, do
‘water valve’. For the storm classification for a system valve do aecctickcircle. List (sewer) access points as ‘sewer manhole’. Follow the same steps with everything including the defining window. Repeat the process for changing scale for the points if necessary. Hit ‘ESC’ ALWAYS before changing the scale of others. Rinse and repeat. Make the storms drains, catch basins, inlets, junction, sand box make it the color green when selecting the color on the layer properties.

#### Creating Labels/Pipes
The basemap is halfway completed on Autodesk Civil 3D, now the labelled need to be created. To do this requires me to be back on ArcGIS Pro to create them. Open the Attributes table for the layer you want (specifically the layers that are lines). Move any column close to each other for easier access if needed (specifically put
diameter/width together to make things easier). Click the add field button, put whatever on the field in all caps. Name the field BEARING. Copy and paste it into the Alias column. Change the data type to be double, or whatever data type. Go to the number format column and make it numeric. To add another field click the bottom left cell. Name the 2nd field ROT_ANGL. Repeat the same things just like the BEARING column. Save the fields after you add a new field (the floppy disk on the tab sections), click it on the fields tab. The newly formed columns will be null originally. The next step involves caluclating rows snd creating separate layers of point values that will used to generate labels. In the search type ‘calculate geometry attributes’. Put the layer I’m working on in the input features. For the field, choose the new column you made, BEARING. Then put in ‘line bearing’ (or a different one) on the property section. Put in the favorited coordinate system within the parameters tab. Then go to the environment tab and put in the favorited coordinate system and ran it. Now the column should be populated with numbers. Search ‘generate points along lines’ after clicking tool icons. Drag selected layer in the input features. The Output feature class must be the training database. If weird, copy the url in the folder. Paste the url before the last backslash. Point placement, by percentage. Percentage should be 50. It’s created for the points along the lines spaced easily by 50 percent. Search ‘Table to Excel’ in the tools icon. Put the layer that has a part of the name “generatepointsalonglines’ in the input. I stored the data in the office database to store. Copy link on the folder in the output folder, paste it before the last backslash. Check use field alias as column header and ran the tool.

The points have been generated into an excel table where we need to process the data even further in order for the the points to be generated as labels. New columns will be added for use when the table is trnaferred back into ArcGIS. Go into the excel, Select the cell at the top left scroll all the way right to the end
to the bottom right. At the bottom right do shift + click to select everything, or just drag the mouse from the top left corner to the bottom right
corner of the entire data. Copy the cells and create a new workbook to paste the data there. In the new workbook, go to the insert tab and click table. It will bring up a window, make sure there is a check on ‘my table has headers’. Click ok. Delete the columns besides the BEARING, ROT_ANGL, OBJECID, ORIG_FID, DIAMETER/WIDTH, and MATERIALS. Repeat if necessary. Insert (a) new column(s) before the BEARING column you created in ArcGIS. Rename the labels. GR_LABELS, UNITS, INI_ANGL. On UNITS, do ‘in.’, click the bottom right corner of the cell and drag to the very bottom of the data. Below the GR_LABELS header, I typed in the cell numbers in the rder of the number, unit, and material. Press enter, go to the bottom right of the cell and drag it down to the rest
of the data (IF IT’S NOT WORKING). It merges the content within the headers together with. Make sure that you check to make sure that they done correctly. Select GR_LABELS cells (Ex: E2-E22, however many), copy, right click and choose
the paste option for values. Delete the columns used to merge THE NUMBER, UNIT, AND MATERIAL. In INI_ANGL type in 90 minus the cell numbers in the BEARING column (Ex: =90-$E2) and press enter, all the column should be populated. Select INI_ANGL from the second cell (Ex: E2) to the bottom of the column, copy, right click and choose paste option for values. If there are cells that have no values for either number, unit, or material then do this: You can either use the drop down for the column or the filter & sort the icon on the top ribbon of excel. Select and filter the wrong data. Then insert ‘XXX’ for the inputs. You can key these in with diameter/width, units, and/or material. Refer to GIS_STORM_PIPE_BOUND_COS_GeneratePointsAlongLines
excel file in your C-Drive for an example.

After fixing the data more in Excel adn tranfered it back into ArcGIS. From the tools icon, search in ‘Excel to Table’. Drag the excel file into the input excel file. Go to the dropdown of sheet, choose Sheet1 and ran it. On the content panels, the table populates. Right-click and open the table. Verify that the file came in. Search ‘join field’ in tools. Drag the ‘pointsalonglines’ layer you made recently into the input table. For input join field, select OBJECTID. Open the attribute table for layers with line and points. Sometimes the OBEJCTID and ORIG_ID won’t match. Drag the standalone table corresponding to the (generatealongpoints) layer into the join table. For the join table field click the arrow. Select OBJECTID [OBJECTID_1]. For the transfer fields, choose whichever you need there. Choose GR_LABELS and INI_ANGL and then ran it. Verfiy to see if the excel table joined with the pointsalonglines layer. Select, ‘select by attributes’. ‘PointsAlongLines’ layer must be selected. On the ‘where’ section, scroll to INI_ANGL. Change the cause to ‘is less than’. For the third box, type in 0. Click Apply and then OK. When handling a huge map with more than 21 points. Click the bottom with the small panes, click the 2nd pane. Right-click ROT_ANGL column and do calculate field. On ‘ROT_ANGL =’ search bar do 365 + !INI_ANGL!. Select the INI_ANGL on the fields section. Click apply and OK. Now the ROT_ANGL is populated with values. Clear the selection, at the bottom of the map click the 1st button. Click ‘Select by attributes’, change the clause to ‘is greater than or equal to’. Apply and OK. Select the 2 nd button at the bottom of the map. Calculate the ROT_ANGL again, right click ROT_ANGL and select calculate field again. Delete the 365 and the + sign, leave the !INI_ANGL! There on the ROT_ANGL=bar. Apply and OK. Select the 1 st button again on the bottom map pane. Go to tools type in ‘Feature Class To Shapefile’. Drag the ‘points’ layer into the input feature. Select the output folder into the office database. Then do the coordinate system to the favorited coordinates and ran it. After all that is done, I went into Civil 3D.

In Civil 3D I finalized the changes for the labels. I dragged the file you were working on into the map pane. On the map, type in ‘mapwspace’, hit enter to turn on the task pane. I clicked on the data tab and then "connect to data". I clicked on the SHP icon, chose the shapefile, and then clicked connect. Click add to map. Click on the SHP_1 (or what name you choose) on the content pane. Then click the layer and after I closed it. Click the layer of the added point layer, then click the style tab. Click on the three dots (…) on the feature label column. I clicked map on the "size content" line. Click Add label, chose feet for the unit dropdown, and increased the font to 12 pt. I chose the A with the black underline on it (or whatever color it is), the underline button. Change it to the color of what your utility classification layer is, in this case orange for sanitary, green for stormwater, and blue for water. Click more colors, click the index color tab, type in the index number if you remember it. I clciked roation, then clicked "use expression". I clicked the + plus symbol, then click property. Scroll down till you’ve found ROT_ANGL or whatever you are looking for and clicked ok. For text content, click GR_LABELS or whatever you need and click advanced, click ‘on top of feature’ and then type in -20 and clicked Apply. Click on the map, on the vector layer tab, click label to tex and clicked ok. The labels have changed. In the layer properties (right side of your screen) change the color to match the color of
the layer (the generatepointsalongline). Click on the Home tab, then click the actual label directly on the map for the ‘pointsalonglines’ layer. Type in on the map selectsimilar. If it’s not working, i clicked the Gameboy icon by the toolspace, this is the properties tab. Change the color to bylayer color. Type ZE on the map to fit map to scale after everything is done.

### Raster Map

## Optimizations

fdfdfdfd

## Lessons Learned:

No matter what your experience level, being an engineer means continuously learning. Every time you build something you always have those *whoa this is awesome* or *wow I actually did it!* moments. This is where you should share those moments! Recruiters and interviewers love to see that you're self-aware and passionate about growing.

## Examples:
Take a look at these couple examples that I have in my own portfolio:

**Palettable:** https://github.com/alecortega/palettable

**Twitter Battle:** https://github.com/alecortega/twitter-battle

**Patch Panel:** https://github.com/alecortega/patch-panel
